---
title: "Class 01: Introduction to Statistical Learning"
author: "Taylor Arnold"
output:
  html_document:
    theme: null
    highlight: null
    css: styles.css
---



## Statistical Learning

Welcome! All of the material for this course, including the
notes here, are available on our class website:

- [https://statsmaths.github.io/stat395/](https://statsmaths.github.io/stat395/)

The website has a detailed syllabus; today I will just cover some of the
most important aspects of it. At the end of class today, I'll finish by
explaining how to set up R and GitHub for the next class.

## What Is "Learning"?

Statistical learning, synonymous with machine learning, is the process
of extracting knowledge from data automatically, usually with the goal
of making predictions on new, unseen data.

A classical example is a spam filter, for which the user keeps labelling
incoming mails as either spam or not spam. A machine learning algorithm
then "learns" a predictive model from data that distinguishes spam from
normal emails, a model which can predict for new emails whether they
are spam or not.

Here are some explicit examples that we will see:

- using physical characteristics of animals to predict whether
they are carnivores
- estimate how much a house is worth given properties such as
number of bedrooms, square footage and its address
- predict whether a flight will be delayed given the carrier,
scheduled departure time, arrival and departure airports
- a crime has been reported at a specific place and time in
Chicago; what type of crime is it?
- here is a picture of a flower, what kind of flower is it?
- given two sentences of text, predict which President used it
in a public speech
- how many page views will a specific Wikipedia page receive
tomorrow?

## Learning Algorithms

This class is not about teaching you a wide range of models.
A common theme, in fact, is that building good models depends
far more on carefully cleaning and featurizing the data than
picking a complex model.

In my experience, most learning algorithms fall into one of
two broad categories:

- nearest neighbors (local): estimate values of new points by
finding previously observed points close to the new ones
- linear models (global): estimate weights for each parameter;
classify new points by summing up these weights

Within these classes, I typically find the need to use only
some combination of the following four algorithms:

1. k-nearest neighbors: a straightforward application of
nearest neighbors
1. gradient boosted trees: adaptively implement nearest
neighbors by determining which directions "matter"
1. elastic net: a linear model with controls on the sizes of the
weights
1. neural networks: iteratively apply collections of elastic
nets to learn a hierarchy of increasingly complex weights

If some of these concepts seem hazy at the moment, that is
perfectly natural. We'll go into much more detail throughout
the semester.

## Teaching Philosophy

I spent several years after finishing graduate school
working in industry in a number of positions. All of these
consisted primarily of collecting and understanding large
datasets and building predictive models from them.

**My goal this semester is give you the skills to do this as well,
at least with medium-sized datasets.** You can then extend
these skills to specific problem domains or learn how to make
them work in real-time or at a large scale.

Because learning to work with data is the most important aspect
of applying statistical learning, we will be working with a
new dataset nearly every class period. Concepts and new
algorithms will be intermixed with these, but the focus will
generally be how to apply them to a specific task.

This class is cross-listed with mathematics and computer science.
We have a fairly diverse set of academic backgrounds in the room.
You will likely encounter parts of some classes which are a bit
over your head. That is not just okay but, in my mind, ideal.
Try your best to catch the basic ideas and don't get worried
about the details. At the same time, you may find the first few
weeks a bit slow as everyone works to get up to the same level.

## Syllabus

*As mentioned, this is just a summary of the larger document located
on the course website.*

This course will be almost entirely code-centric. We will be using R
throughout the semester. All of my notes (including this document) will be
given as R markdown notebooks. These are self-contained files that include
code, output, text, and graphics. All of your assignments will also be
handed in as R markdown notebooks. No prior experience with R will be
assumed. The course is designed to require no formal prior programming
experience, but you should ideally have some familiarity with a scripting
language such as R, Python, Matlab, or Mathematica.

### labs

Every course (other than this first one) through Thanksgiving will
have an associated file named `lab00.R`, with the appropriate
class number replaced for the `00`.
By noon before the start of the next class, you must complete the
questions contained within the lab notebook. Assignments will be
submitted through GitHub; this process is explained more during
our next class.

Each lab will generally consist of looking at a new dataset with
some missing responses. You need to build, documenting all
of your steps and justify why you are doing them, a predictive
model and fill in the missing values.

You will receive an auto-graded score by the start of class showing
how well you performed on the estimation task. While getting good
prediction rates is important, your grades on labs will be more
holistically based on your general approach and overall write-up.
You will receive detailed feedback and a letter grade three times
throughout the semester (roughly every 4th week) summarizing your
performance on the labs.


### final project

You will also complete a course project. The last two weeks of the
semester will consist of presentations of these projects. I plan to
assign these just after Fall Break.

### grades

Final grades will be determined by the following weighting scheme:

- labs (66%)
- final project (34%)

The actual
syllabus file has more details concerning the specifics of
how to convert between numeric and letter grades.

### because someone always asks

There is no required textbook and there are no exams, final or
otherwise.

### also, because someone always asks

We will have one class outside, probably around week 7. Details
to follow.

## Class Structure

Each class will generally be broken into three sections:

1. **first**: walking through new concepts by applying
techniques to a new dataset using my notes
2. **second**: pairing or tripling off to share your
results from the most recent lab
3. **third**: share results from the recent lab with
the entire class (time remaining)

Depending on the task, I may ask you to present the work
of your partner rather than your own. Typically, the lab
due for the next class will use the data from the prior
classes notes.

Because of the class structure, ideally you should bring
your laptop or at least a tablet to each class meeting.
If this is a problem, I suggest pairing up with someone
who can bring a computer to class. If this is also not
feasible, please let me know as soon as possible.

## Set-up for next time

For next time, you need to get GitHub, R and RStudio set-up.
For GitHub, if you do not already have an account, go to the main
webpage and create a free account. Try to pick a professional name
as you may find that you want to make this public at some point:

- https://github.com/

Once you have created your account, add some basic information
to your profile. At a minimum, include a photo and your preferred
name.

We will be using the R programming language for this course. Please follow
the instructions on the following website to download and install R on
your machine.

- Windows: [https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/](https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/)
- Mac: [https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/macosx/R-3.4.1.pkg](https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/macosx/R-3.4.1.pkg)

Next, download RStudio. This is a nice GUI (I'm using it right now) that
improves the user experience of using R. Download it here:

- Windows: [https://download1.rstudio.org/RStudio-1.0.153.exe](https://download1.rstudio.org/RStudio-1.0.153.exe)
- Mac: [https://download1.rstudio.org/RStudio-1.0.153.dmg](https://download1.rstudio.org/RStudio-1.0.153.dmg)

Next class, I will explain more about how to use these and
get them set up for your first lab assignment.

## For next class

To recap, you have to do three things before our next class:

1. create a GitHub account; add a photo and preferred name
2. download and install R
3. download and install RStudio

**If you run into any problems with this set-up, please e-mail
me or drop by my office. We can debug after class on Thursday
if need be. You will NEED this to work for the assignment over
the weekend.**

## Questions

As a last task, please complete the brief questionnaires I am
handing out.

In case you're curious, here are my answers:

1. Taylor Arnold (Taylor or Dr. Arnold; please don't mix them up though!)
2. expert: R; advanced: C, C++, Python; familiar with: Java (yuck), javascript
3. technically I never took linear algebra, but I do know it very well :)
4. predicting stuff is super fun!
5. text and image analysis with applications to linguistics and media studies

